You have misled the youthful Prince. FALSTAFF. The
Well, the King hath sever'd you. I hear you are going
What is the matter? Keep the peace here, ho!
How now, Sir John! what, are you brawling here?
Doth this become your place, your time, and business?
You should have been well on your way to York.
Stand from him, fellow; wherefore hang'st thou upon him?
For what sum?
How comes this, Sir John? Fie! What man of good
temper would endure this tempest of exclamation? Are you not
ashamed to enforce a poor widow to so rough a course to come by
her own?
Sir John, Sir John, I am well acquainted with your
manner of wrenching the true cause the false way. It is not a
confident brow, nor the throng of words that come with such more
than impudent sauciness from you, can thrust me from a level
consideration. You have, as it appears to me, practis'd upon the
easy yielding spirit of this woman, and made her serve your uses
both in purse and in person.
Pray thee, peace. Pay her the debt you owe her, and
unpay the villainy you have done with her; the one you may do
with sterling money, and the other with current repentance.
You speak as having power to do wrong; but answer in
th' effect of your reputation, and satisfy the poor woman.
Now, Master Gower, what news?
I have heard better news.
Where lay the King to-night?
Come all his forces back?
You shall have letters of me presently.
Come, go along with me, good Master Gower.
What's the matter?
Sir John, you loiter here too long, being you are to
take soldiers up in counties as you go.
What foolish master taught you these manners, Sir
John?
Now, the Lord lighten thee! Thou art a great fool.
                                                      Exeunt
How doth the King?
I hope, not dead.
I would his Majesty had call'd me with him.
The service that I truly did his life
Hath left me open to all injuries.
I know he doth not, and do arm myself
To welcome the condition of the time,
Which cannot look more hideously upon me
Than I have drawn it in my fantasy.
          Enter LANCASTER, CLARENCE, GLOUCESTER,
                 WESTMORELAND, and others
O God, I fear all will be overturn'd.
Peace be with us, lest we be heavier!
Sweet Princes, what I did, I did in honour,
Led by th' impartial conduct of my soul;
And never shall you see that I will beg
A ragged and forestall'd remission.
If truth and upright innocency fail me,
I'll to the King my master that is dead,
And tell him who hath sent me after him.
Good morrow, and God save your Majesty!
I am assur'd, if I be measur'd rightly,
Your Majesty hath no just cause to hate me.
I then did use the person of your father;
The image of his power lay then in me;
And in th' administration of his law,
Whiles I was busy for the commonwealth,
Your Highness pleased to forget my place,
The majesty and power of law and justice,
The image of the King whom I presented,
And struck me in my very seat of judgment;
Whereon, as an offender to your father,
I gave bold way to my authority
And did commit you. If the deed were ill,
Be you contented, wearing now the garland,
To have a son set your decrees at nought,
To pluck down justice from your awful bench,
To trip the course of law, and blunt the sword
That guards the peace and safety of your person;
Nay, more, to spurn at your most royal image,
And mock your workings in a second body.
Question your royal thoughts, make the case yours;
Be now the father, and propose a son;
Hear your own dignity so much profan'd,
See your most dreadful laws so loosely slighted,
Behold yourself so by a son disdain'd;
And then imagine me taking your part
And, in your power, soft silencing your son.
After this cold considerance, sentence me;
And, as you are a king, speak in your state
What I have done that misbecame my place,
My person, or my liege's sovereignty.
Have you your wits? Know you what 'tis you speak?
Go, carry Sir John Falstaff to the Fleet;
Take all his company along with him.
I cannot now speak. I will hear you soon.
Take them away.
And so they are.
He hath.
