What think you of the Scottish lord, his neighbour? PORTIA.
Quick, quick, I pray thee, draw the curtain straight;
The Prince of Arragon hath ta'en his oath,
And comes to his election presently.
   Flourish of cornets. Enter the PRINCE OF ARRAGON,
                PORTIA, and their trains
The ancient saying is no heresy:
Hanging and wiving goes by destiny.
Bassanio, Lord Love, if thy will it be!        Exeunt
My lord and lady, it is now our time
That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper
To cry 'Good joy.' Good joy, my lord and lady!
Madam, it is, so you stand pleas'd withal.
What, and stake down?
Shall they see us?
Why, shall we turn to men?
From both, my lord. Bellario greets your Grace.
                                         [Presents a letter]
He attendeth here hard by
To know your answer, whether you'll admit him.
'Tis well you offer it behind her back;
The wish would make else an unquiet house.
Sir, I would speak with you.
[Aside to PORTIA]  I'll See if I can get my husband's ring,
Which I did make him swear to keep for ever.
Come, good sir, will you show me to this house?
                                                      Exeunt
When the moon shone, we did not see the candle.
It is your music, madam, of the house.
Silence bestows that virtue on it, madam.
What talk you of the posy or the value?
You swore to me, when I did give it you,
That you would wear it till your hour of death,
And that it should lie with you in your grave;
Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths,
You should have been respective and have kept it.
Gave it a judge's clerk! No, God's my judge,
The clerk will ne'er wear hair on's face that had it.
Ay, if a woman live to be a man.
Nor I in yours
Till I again see mine.
And I his clerk; therefore be well advis'd
How you do leave me to mine own protection.
And pardon me, my gentle Gratiano,
For that same scrubbed boy, the doctor's clerk,
In lieu of this, last night did lie with me.
Ay, but the clerk that never means to do it,
Unless he live until he be a man.
Ay, and I'll give them him without a fee.
There do I give to you and Jessica,
From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift,
After his death, of all he dies possess'd of.
