Well, I hope it be not so.
Why, sir, my wife is not young.
Love my wife!
What name, sir?
 [Aside]  I will be patient; I will find out this.
I will seek out Falstaff.
If I do find it-well.
'Twas a good sensible fellow. Well.
         MISTRESS PAGE and MISTRESS FORD come forward
I melancholy! I am not melancholy. Get you home;
go.
You heard what this knave told me, did you not?
Do you think there is truth in them?
Were they his men?
I like it never the better for that. Does he lie at the
Garter?
I do not misdoubt my wife; but I would be loath to
turn them together. A man may be too confident. I would
have nothing lie on my head. I cannot be thus satisfied.
                       Enter HOST
Good mine host o' th' Garter, a word with you.
None, I protest; but I'll give you a pottle of burnt
sack to give me recourse to him, and tell him my name is
Brook-only for a jest.
Though Page be a secure fool, and stands so firmly on
his wife's frailty, yet I cannot put off my opinion so
easily. She was in his company at Page's house, and what
they made there I know not. Well, I will look further into
't, and I have a disguise to sound Falstaff. If I find her
honest, I lose not my labour; if she be otherwise, 'tis labour
well bestowed.                                          Exit
Bless you, sir! FALSTAFF. And you, sir! Would you speak with
Never. FALSTAFF. Have you importun'd her to such a purpose?
Never. FALSTAFF. Of what quality was your love, then? FORD.
Want no money, Sir John; you shall want none. FALSTAFF. Want no
Well met, Mistress Page. Whither go you?
Ay; and as idle as she may hang together, for want of
company. I think, if your husbands were dead, you two
would marry.
Where had you this pretty weathercock?
Sir John Falstaff!
Indeed she is.
Has Page any brains? Hath he any eyes? Hath he any
thinking? Sure, they sleep; he hath no use of them. Why,
this boy will carry a letter twenty mile as easy as a cannon
will shoot pointblank twelve score. He pieces out his wife's
inclination; he gives her folly motion and advantage; and
now she's going to my wife, and Falstaff's boy with her. A
man may hear this show'r sing in the wind. And Falstaff's
boy with her! Good plots! They are laid; and our revolted
wives share damnation together. Well; I will take him,
then torture my wife, pluck the borrowed veil of modesty
from the so seeming Mistress Page, divulge Page himself
for a secure and wilful Actaeon; and to these violent proceedings
all my neighbours shall cry aim.  [Clock strikes]
The clock gives me my cue, and my assurance bids me
search; there I shall find Falstaff. I shall be rather prais'd
for this than mock'd; for it is as positive as the earth is firm
that Falstaff is there. I will go.
 Enter PAGE, SHALLOW, SLENDER, HOST, SIR HUGH EVANS,
                          CAIUS, and RUGBY
Trust me, a good knot; I have good cheer at home,
and I pray you all go with me.
I beseech you, heartily, some of you go home with me
to dinner: besides your cheer, you shall have sport; I will
show you a monster. Master Doctor, you shall go; so shall
you, Master Page; and you, Sir Hugh.
 [Aside]  I think I shall drink in pipe-wine first with
him. I'll make him dance. Will you go, gentles?
Pray you come near. If I suspect without cause, why
then make sport at me, then let me be your jest; I deserve
it. How now, whither bear you this?
Buck? I would I could wash myself of the buck!
Buck, buck, buck! ay, buck! I warrant you, buck; and of
the season too, it shall appear.  [Exeunt SERVANTS with
basket]  Gentlemen, I have dream'd to-night; I'll tell you my
dream. Here, here, here be my keys; ascend my chambers,
search, seek, find out. I'll warrant we'll unkennel the fox.
Let me stop this way first.  [Locking the door]  So, now
uncape.
True, Master Page. Up, gentlemen, you shall see sport
anon; follow me, gentlemen.                             Exit
I cannot find him; may be the knave bragg'd of that
he could not compass.
Ay, I do so.
Amen.
Ay, ay; I must bear it.
'Tis my fault, Master Page; I suffer for it.
Well, I promis'd you a dinner. Come, come, walk in
the Park. I pray you pardon me; I will hereafter make
known to you why I have done this. Come, wife, come,
Mistress Page; I pray you pardon me; pray heartly,
pardon me.
Any thing.
Pray you go, Master Page.
Bless you, sir!
That, indeed, Sir John, is my business.
And sped you, sir?
How so, sir; did she change her determination?
What, while you were there?
And did he search for you, and could not find you?
A buck-basket!
And how long lay you there?
In good sadness, sir, I am sorry that for my sake you
have suffer'd all this. My suit, then, is desperate;
you'll undertake her no more.
'Tis past eight already, sir.
Hum! ha! Is this a vision? Is this a dream? Do I sleep?
Master Ford, awake; awake, Master Ford. There's a hole
made in your best coat, Master Ford. This 'tis to be
married; this 'tis to have linen and buck-baskets! Well, I will
proclaim myself what I am; I will now take the lecher; he
is at my house. He cannot scape me; 'tis impossible he
should; he cannot creep into a halfpenny purse nor into
a pepper box. But, lest the devil that guides him should aid
him, I will search impossible places. Though what I am I
cannot avoid, yet to be what I would not shall not make
me tame. If I have horns to make one mad, let the proverb
go with me-I'll be horn mad.                            Exit
Ay, but if it prove true, Master Page, have you any
way then to unfool me again? Set down the basket, villain!
Somebody call my wife. Youth in a basket! O you panderly
rascals, there's a knot, a ging, a pack, a conspiracy
against me. Now shall the devil be sham'd. What, wife, I
say! Come, come forth; behold what honest clothes you
send forth to bleaching.
So say I too, sir.
                 Re-enter MISTRESS FORD
Come hither, Mistress Ford; Mistress Ford, the honest
woman, the modest wife, the virtuous creature, that hath
the jealous fool to her husband! I suspect without cause,
Mistress, do I?
Well said, brazen-face; hold it out. Come forth, sirrah.
                       [Pulling clothes out of the basket]
I shall find you anon.
Empty the basket, I say.
Master Page, as I am a man, there was one convey'd
out of my house yesterday in this basket. Why may not
he be there again? In my house I am sure he is; my
intelligence is true; my jealousy is reasonable.
Pluck me out all the linen.
Well, he's not here I seek for.
Help to search my house this one time. If I find not
what I seek, show no colour for my extremity; let me for
ever be your table sport; let them say of me 'As jealous as
Ford, that search'd a hollow walnut for his wife's leman.'
Satisfy me once more; once more search with me.
Old woman? what old woman's that?
A witch, a quean, an old cozening quean! Have I not
forbid her my house? She comes of errands, does she? We
are simple men; we do not know what's brought to pass
under the profession of fortune-telling. She works by
charms, by spells, by th' figure, and such daub'ry as this
is, beyond our element. We know nothing. Come down, you
witch, you hag you; come down, I say.
I'll prat her.  [Beating him]  Out of my door, you
witch, you hag, you. baggage, you polecat, you ronyon!
Out, out! I'll conjure you, I'll fortune-tell you.
                                               Exit FALSTAFF
Hang her, witch!
Will you follow, gentlemen? I beseech you follow;
see but the issue of my jealousy; if I cry out thus upon no
trail, never trust me when I open again.
Pardon me, wife. Henceforth, do what thou wilt;
I rather will suspect the sun with cold
Than thee with wantonness. Now doth thy honour stand,
In him that was of late an heretic,
As firm as faith.
There is no better way than that they spoke of.
The children must
Be practis'd well to this or they'll nev'r do 't.
That will be excellent. I'll go buy them vizards.
Nay, I'll to him again, in name of Brook;
He'll tell me all his purpose. Sure, he'll come.
Went you not to her yesterday, sir, as you told me
you had appointed?
Now, sir, who's a cuckold now? Master Brook,
Falstaff's a knave, a cuckoldly knave; here are his horns,
Master Brook; and, Master Brook, he hath enjoyed nothing of
Ford's but his buck-basket, his cudgel, and twenty pounds
of money, which must be paid to Master Brook; his horses
are arrested for it, Master Brook.
Ay, and an ox too; both the proofs are extant.
Well said, fairy Hugh.
I will never mistrust my wife again, till thou art able
to woo her in good English.
What, a hodge-pudding? a bag of flax?
And one that is as slanderous as Satan?
And as wicked as his wife?
Marry, sir, we'll bring you to Windsor, to one Master
Brook, that you have cozen'd of money, to whom you
should have been a pander. Over and above that you have
suffer'd, I think to repay that money will be a biting
affliction.
This is strange. Who hath got the right Anne?
Stand not amaz'd; here is no remedy.
In love, the heavens themselves do guide the state;
Money buys lands, and wives are sold by fate.
Let it be so. Sir John,
To Master Brook you yet shall hold your word;
For he, to-night, shall lie with Mistress Ford.       Exeunt
QUINCE, BOTTOM, FLUTE, SNOUT, STARVELING, AND SNUG
