Judge you, my Lord of Warwick, then, between us.
And on my side it is so well apparell'd,
So clear, so shining, and so evident,
That it will glimmer through a blind man's eye.
Let him that is no coward nor no flatterer,
But dare maintain the party of the truth,
Pluck a red rose from off this thorn with me.
Good Master Vernon, it is well objected;
If I have fewest, I subscribe in silence.
Prick not your finger as you pluck it off,
Lest, bleeding, you do paint the white rose red,
And fall on my side so, against your will.
Well, well, come on; who else?
Here in my scabbard, meditating that
Shall dye your white rose in a bloody red.
No, Plantagenet,
'Tis not for fear but anger that thy cheeks
Blush for pure shame to counterfeit our roses,
And yet thy tongue will not confess thy error.
Hath not thy rose a thorn, Plantagenet?
Well, I'll find friends to wear my bleeding roses,
That shall maintain what I have said is true,
Where false Plantagenet dare not be seen.
Away, away, good William de la Pole!
We grace the yeoman by conversing with him.
By Him that made me, I'll maintain my words
On any plot of ground in Christendom.
Was not thy father, Richard Earl of Cambridge,
For treason executed in our late king's days?
And by his treason stand'st not thou attainted,
Corrupted, and exempt from ancient gentry?
His trespass yet lives guilty in thy blood;
And till thou be restor'd thou art a yeoman.
Ay, thou shalt find us ready for thee still;
And know us by these colours for thy foes
For these my friends in spite of thee shall wear.
Have with thee, Pole. Farewell, ambitious
Richard.                                                Exit
My lord, it were your duty to forbear.
Methinks my lord should be religious,
And know the office that belongs to such.
Yes, when his holy state is touch'd so near.
 [Aside]  Perish, base Prince, ignoble Duke of
York!
And this is mine: sweet Henry, favour him.
Your private grudge, my Lord of York, will out,
Though ne'er so cunningly you smother it.
The quarrel toucheth none but us alone;
Betwixt ourselves let us decide it then.
It is too late; I cannot send them now.
This expedition was by York and Talbot
Too rashly plotted; all our general force
Might with a sally of the very town
Be buckled with. The over daring Talbot
Hath sullied all his gloss of former honour
By this unheedful, desperate, wild adventure.
York set him on to fight and die in shame.
That, Talbot dead, great York might bear the name.
How now, Sir William! Whither were you sent?
York set him on; York should have sent him aid.
York lies; he might have sent and had the horse.
I owe him little duty and less love,
And take foul scorn to fawn on him by sending.
Come, go; I will dispatch the horsemen straight;
Within six hours they will be at his aid.
If he be dead, brave Talbot, then, adieu!
Cousin of Buckingham, though Humphrey's pride
And greatness of his place be grief to us,
Yet let us watch the haughty cardinal;
His insolence is more intolerable
Than all the princes in the land beside;
If Gloucester be displac'd, he'll be Protector.
If Somerset be unworthy of the place,
Let York be Regent; I will yield to him.
Thy sumptuous buildings and thy wife's attire
Have cost a mass of public treasury.
I humbly thank your royal Majesty.
All health unto my gracious sovereign!
That all your interest in those territories
Is utterly bereft you; all is lost.
If York, with all his far-fet policy,
Had been the Regent there instead of me,
He never would have stay'd in France so long.
And in the number, thee that wishest shame!
Rear up his body; wring him by the nose.
My lord,
I'll yield myself to prison willingly,
Or unto death, to do my country good.
O monstrous traitor! I arrest thee, York,
Of capital treason 'gainst the King and crown.
Obey, audacious traitor; kneel for grace.
My lords, forbear this talk; here comes the King.
       Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD, attended; LADY
      GREY, as Queen; PEMBROKE, STAFFORD, HASTINGS,
  and others. Four stand on one side, and four on the other
What are they that fly there?
My liege, it is young Henry, Earl of Richmond.
My lord, I like not of this flight of Edward's;
For doubtless Burgundy will yield him help,
And we shall have more wars befor't be long.
As Henry's late presaging prophecy
Did glad my heart with hope of this young Richmond,
So doth my heart misgive me, in these conflicts,
What may befall him to his harm and ours.
Therefore, Lord Oxford, to prevent the worst,
Forthwith we'll send him hence to Brittany,
Till storms be past of civil enmity.
It shall be so; he shall to Brittany.
Come therefore, let's about it speedily.              Exeunt
Somerset, Somerset, for Lancaster!
                          [He and his forces enter the city]
Ah, Warwick, Warwick! wert thou as we are,
We might recover all our loss again.
The Queen from France hath brought a puissant power;
Even now we heard the news. Ah, couldst thou fly!
Ah, Warwick! Montague hath breath'd his last;
And to the latest gasp cried out for Warwick,
And said 'Commend me to my valiant brother.'
And more he would have said; and more he spoke,
Which sounded like a clamour in a vault,
That mought not be distinguish'd; but at last,
I well might hear, delivered with a groan,
'O farewell, Warwick!'
And he that will not fight for such a hope,
Go home to bed and, like the owl by day,
If he arise, be mock'd and wond'red at.
But he's deceiv'd; we are in readiness.
Nor I, but stoop with patience to my fortune.
                         Exeunt OXFORD and SOMERSET, guarded
