God save your Grace!
Away, you whoreson upright rabbit, away!
An you do not make him be hang'd among you, the gallows
shall have wrong.
Well, my lord. He heard of your Grace's coming to town.
There's a letter for you.
In bodily health, sir.
Yea, my lord.
At the old place, my lord, in Eastcheap.
I have no tongue, sir.
Pray thee go down, good ancient.
Be gone, good ancient; this will grow to a brawl anon.
Come, get you down stairs.
Yea, sir. The rascal's drunk. You have hurt him, sir, i'
th' shoulder.
You must away to court, sir, presently;
A dozen captains stay at door for you.
 [ Within]  Mistress Tearsheet!
 [ Within]  Bid Mistress Tearsheet come to my master.
I beseech you, which is Justice Shallow?
My captain, sir, commends him to you; my captain, Sir
John Falstaff- a tall gentleman, by heaven, and a most gallant
leader.
Sir, pardon; a soldier is better accommodated than with a
wife.
Pardon, sir; I have heard the word. 'Phrase' call you it?
By this day, I know not the phrase; but I will maintain the word
with my sword to be a soldier-like word, and a word of exceeding
good command, by heaven. Accommodated: that is, when a man is, as
they say, accommodated; or, when a man is being-whereby 'a may be
thought to be accommodated; which is an excellent thing.
                          Enter FALSTAFF
Go to; stand aside.
Go to; stand aside.
Well said; th'art a good fellow.
Sir, a word with you. I have three pound to free Mouldy
and Bullcalf.
Hold, Wart. Traverse- thus, thus, thus.
The army is discharged all and gone.
I am glad to see your worship.
An I might see you there, Davy!
Yea, sir, in a pottle-pot.
And I'll stick by him, sir.
O joyful day!
I would not take a knighthood for my fortune.
Well met, Corporal Nym.
What, are Ancient Pistol and you friends yet?
I will bestow a breakfast to make you friends; and we'll
be all three sworn brothers to France. Let't be so, good Corporal
Nym.
It is certain, Corporal, that he is married to Nell
Quickly; and certainly she did you wrong, for you were
troth-plight to her.
Here comes Ancient Pistol and his wife. Good Corporal, be
patient here.
Good Lieutenant, good Corporal, offer nothing here.
Hear me, hear me what I say: he that strikes the first
stroke I'll run him up to the hilts, as I am a soldier.
                                                     [Draws]
Away, you rogue.
Come, shall I make you two friends? We must to France
together; why the devil should we keep knives to cut one
another's throats?
By this sword, he that makes the first thrust I'll kill
him; by this sword, I will.
Corporal Nym, an thou wilt be friends, be friends; an
thou wilt not, why then be enemies with me too. Prithee put up.
Would I were with him, wheresome'er he is, either in
heaven or in hell!
And of women.
Well, the fuel is gone that maintain'd that fire: that's
all the riches I got in his service.
Farewell, hostess.                     [Kissing her]
On, on, on, on, on! to the breach, to the breach!
