Is my name Talbot, and am I your son?
And shall I fly? O, if you love my mother,
Dishonour not her honourable name,
To make a bastard and a slave of me!
The world will say he is not Talbot's blood
That basely fled when noble Talbot stood.
He that flies so will ne'er return again.
Then let me stay; and, father, do you fly.
Your loss is great, so your regard should be;
My worth unknown, no loss is known in me;
Upon my death the French can little boast;
In yours they will, in you all hopes are lost.
Flight cannot stain the honour you have won;
But mine it will, that no exploit have done;
You fled for vantage, every one will swear;
But if I bow, they'll say it was for fear.
There is no hope that ever I will stay
If the first hour I shrink and run away.
Here, on my knee, I beg mortality,
Rather than life preserv'd with infamy.
Ay, rather than I'll shame my mother's womb.
To fight I will, but not to fly the foe.
No part of him but will be shame in me.
Yes, your renowned name; shall flight abuse it?
You cannot witness for me, being slain.
If death be so apparent, then both fly.
And shall my youth be guilty of such blame?
No more can I be severed from your side
Than can yourself yourself yourself in twain divide.
Stay, go, do what you will, the like do I;
For live I will not if my father die.
O, twice my father, twice am I thy son!
The life thou gav'st me first was lost and done
Till with thy warlike sword, despite of fate,
To my determin'd time thou gav'st new date.
The sword of Orleans hath not made me smart;
These words of yours draw life-blood from my heart.
On that advantage, bought with such a shame,
To save a paltry life and slay bright fame,
Before young Talbot from old Talbot fly,
The coward horse that bears me fall and die!
And like me to the peasant boys of France,
To be shame's scorn and subject of mischance!
Surely, by all the glory you have won,
An if I fly, I am not Talbot's son;
Then talk no more of flight, it is no boot;
If son to Talbot, die at Talbot's foot.
They have the more need to sleep now, then.
So he had need, for 'tis threadbare. Well, I say it was never
merry world in England since gentlemen came up.
The nobility think scorn to go in leather aprons.
True; and yet it is said 'Labour in thy vocation'; which is
as much to say as 'Let the magistrates be labouring men'; and
therefore should we be magistrates.
I see them! I see them! There's Best's son, the tanner of
Wingham-
And Dick the butcher-
And Smith the weaver-
Come, come, let's fall in with them.
            Drum. Enter CADE, DICK THE BUTCHER, SMITH
         THE WEAVER, and a SAWYER, with infinite numbers
[Aside] Mass, 'twill be sore law then; for he was thrust in
the mouth with a spear, and 'tis not whole yet.
[Aside] Then we are like to have biting statutes, unless his
teeth be pull'd out.
