What would my lord and father?
I shall observe him with all care and love.
He is not there to-day; he dines in London.
With Poins, and other his continual followers.
O my royal father!
No, no; he cannot long hold out these pangs.
Th' incessant care and labour of his mind
Hath wrought the mure that should confine it in
So thin that life looks through, and will break out.
The river hath thrice flow'd, no ebb between;
And the old folk, Time's doting chronicles,
Say it did so a little time before
That our great grandsire, Edward, sick'd and died.
His eye is hollow, and he changes much.
I am here, brother, full of heaviness.
Let us withdraw into the other room.
Doth the King call?
We left the Prince my brother here, my liege,
Who undertook to sit and watch by you.
Well, you must now speak Sir John Falstaff fair;
Which swims against your stream of quality.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER] He knows the game; how true he
keeps the wind!
[Aside to GLOUCESTER] I fear her not, unless she chance
to fall.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER] I think he means to beg a child of
her.
As red as fire! Nay, then her wax must melt.
He is the bluntest wooer in Christendom.
When he was made a shriver, 'twas for shrift.
To who, my lord?
That's a day longer than a wonder lasts.
Alas, you know 'tis far from hence to France!
How could he stay till Warwick made return?
I mind to tell him plainly what I think.
As well as Lewis of France or the Earl of Warwick,
Which are so weak of courage and in judgment
That they'll take no offence at our abuse.
Then this is mine opinion: that King Lewis
Becomes your enemy for mocking him
About the marriage of the Lady Bona.
For this one speech Lord Hastings well deserves
To have the heir of the Lord Hungerford.
Or else you would not have bestow'd the heir
Of the Lord Bonville on your new wife's son,
And leave your brothers to go speed elsewhere.
In choosing for yourself you show'd your judgment,
Which being shallow, you shall give me leave
To play the broker in mine own behalf;
And to that end I shortly mind to leave you.
Belike the elder; Clarence will have the younger.
Now, brother king, farewell, and sit you fast,
For I will hence to Warwick's other daughter;
That, though I want a kingdom, yet in marriage
I may not prove inferior to yourself.
You that love me and Warwick, follow me.
                                  Exit, and SOMERSET follows
Fear not that, my lord.
No, Warwick, thou art worthy of the sway,
To whom the heav'ns in thy nativity
Adjudg'd an olive branch and laurel crown,
As likely to be blest in peace and war;
And therefore I yield thee my free consent.
That he consents, if Warwick yield consent,
For on thy fortune I repose myself.
What else? And that succession be determin'd.
It shall be done, my sovereign, with all speed.
A little fire is quickly trodden out,
Which, being suffer'd, rivers cannot quench.
In sign of truth, I kiss your Highness' hand.
Clarence, Clarence, for Lancaster!
[Taking the red rose from his hat and throwing
  it at WARWICK]
Father of Warwick, know you what this means?
Look here, I throw my infamy at thee.
I will not ruinate my father's house,
Who gave his blood to lime the stones together,
And set up Lancaster. Why, trowest thou, Warwick,
That Clarence is so harsh, so blunt, unnatural,
To bend the fatal instruments of war
Against his brother and his lawful King?
Perhaps thou wilt object my holy oath.
To keep that oath were more impiety
Than Jephtha when he sacrific'd his daughter.
I am so sorry for my trespass made
That, to deserve well at my brother's hands,
I here proclaim myself thy mortal foe;
With resolution whereso'er I meet thee-
As I will meet thee, if thou stir abroad-
To plague thee for thy foul misleading me.
And so, proud-hearted Warwick, I defy thee,
And to my brother turn my blushing cheeks.
Pardon me, Edward, I will make amends;
And, Richard, do not frown upon my faults,
For I will henceforth be no more unconstant.
A little gale will soon disperse that cloud
And blow it to the source from whence it came;
Thy very beams will dry those vapours up,
For every cloud engenders not a storm.
Untutor'd lad, thou art too malapert.
And there's for twitting me with perjury.
                                                 [Stabs him]
What? what?
By heaven, I will not do thee so much ease.
Didst thou not hear me swear I would not do it?
To London, all in post; and, as I guess,
To make a bloody supper in the Tower.
The duty that I owe unto your Majesty
I seal upon the lips of this sweet babe.
What will your Grace have done with Margaret?
Reignier, her father, to the King of France
Hath pawn'd the Sicils and Jerusalem,
And hither have they sent it for her ransom.
