Who, the Lord Timon? He is my very good friend, and an
honourable gentleman.
Fie, no: do not believe it; he cannot want for money.
How?
What a strange case was that! Now, before the gods, I am
asham'd on't. Denied that honourable man! There was very little
honour show'd in't. For my own part, I must needs confess I have
received some small kindnesses from him, as money, plate, jewels,
and such-like trifles, nothing comparing to his; yet, had he
mistook him and sent to me, I should ne'er have denied his
occasion so many talents.
                         Enter SERVILIUS
Servilius? You are kindly met, sir. Fare thee well; commend
me to thy honourable virtuous lord, my very exquisite friend.
Ha! What has he sent? I am so much endeared to that lord:
he's ever sending. How shall I thank him, think'st thou? And what
has he sent now?
I know his lordship is but merry with me;
He cannot want fifty-five hundred talents.
Dost thou speak seriously, Servilius?
What a wicked beast was I to disfurnish myself against such
a good time, when I might ha' shown myself honourable! How
unluckily it happ'ned that I should purchase the day before for a
little part and undo a great deal of honour! Servilius, now
before the gods, I am not able to do- the more beast, I say! I
was sending to use Lord Timon myself, these gentlemen can
witness; but I would not for the wealth of Athens I had done't
now. Commend me bountifully to his good lordship, and I hope his
honour will conceive the fairest of me, because I have no power
to be kind. And tell him this from me: I count it one of my
greatest afflictions, say, that I cannot pleasure such an
honourable gentleman. Good Servilius, will you befriend me so far
as to use mine own words to him?
I'll look you out a good turn, Servilius.
                                              Exit SERVILIUS
True, as you said, Timon is shrunk indeed;
And he that's once denied will hardly speed.            Exit
Give us the proudest prisoner of the Goths,
That we may hew his limbs, and on a pile
Ad manes fratrum sacrifice his flesh
Before this earthy prison of their bones,
That so the shadows be not unappeas'd,
Nor we disturb'd with prodigies on earth.
Away with him, and make a fire straight;
And with our swords, upon a pile of wood,
Let's hew his limbs till they be clean consum'd.
                            Exeunt TITUS' SONS, with ALARBUS
See, lord and father, how we have perform'd
Our Roman rites: Alarbus' limbs are lopp'd,
And entrails feed the sacrificing fire,
Whose smoke like incense doth perfume the sky.
Remaineth nought but to inter our brethren,
And with loud 'larums welcome them to Rome.
Proud Saturnine, interrupter of the good
That noble-minded Titus means to thee!
And that he will and shall, if Lucius live.
My lord, you are unjust, and more than so:
In wrongful quarrel you have slain your son.
Dead, if you will; but not to be his wife,
That is another's lawful promis'd love.                 Exit
But let us give him burial, as becomes;
Give Mutius burial with our bretheren.
Dear father, soul and substance of us all-
There lie thy bones, sweet Mutius, with thy friends,
Till we with trophies do adorn thy tomb.
We do, and vow to heaven and to his Highness
That what we did was mildly as we might,
Tend'ring our sister's honour and our own.
O noble father, you lament in vain;
The Tribunes hear you not, no man is by,
And you recount your sorrows to a stone.
My gracious lord, no tribune hears you speak.
To rescue my two brothers from their death;
For which attempt the judges have pronounc'd
My everlasting doom of banishment.
Ay me! this object kills me.
Speak, gentle sister, who hath martyr'd thee?
O, say thou for her, who hath done this deed?
Sweet father, cease your tears; for at your grief
See how my wretched sister sobs and weeps.
Ah, my Lavinia, I will wipe thy cheeks.
Stay, father! for that noble hand of thine,
That hath thrown down so many enemies,
Shall not be sent. My hand will serve the turn,
My youth can better spare my blood than you,
And therefore mine shall save my brothers' lives.
By heaven, it shall not go!
Sweet father, if I shall be thought thy son,
Let me redeem my brothers both from death.
Then I'll go fetch an axe.
Ah, that this sight should make so deep a wound,
And yet detested life not shrink thereat!
That ever death should let life bear his name,
Where life hath no more interest but to breathe!
                                      [LAVINIA kisses TITUS]
Farewell, Andronicus, my noble father,
The woefull'st man that ever liv'd in Rome.
Farewell, proud Rome; till Lucius come again,
He leaves his pledges dearer than his life.
Farewell, Lavinia, my noble sister;
O, would thou wert as thou tofore hast been!
But now nor Lucius nor Lavinia lives
But in oblivion and hateful griefs.
If Lucius live, he will requite your wrongs
And make proud Saturnine and his emperess
Beg at the gates like Tarquin and his queen.
Now will I to the Goths, and raise a pow'r
To be reveng'd on Rome and Saturnine.                   Exit
